UDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: in
the aftermath
of President Trump's missile
strikes on Syria,
a look at next moves in a moment
of heightened
global tensions.
Then:
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
We are here to celebrate
history.
JUDY WOODRUFF: As Neil Gorsuch
is sworn in
as an associate Supreme Court
justice, how
the newest member may tip the
scales in some
key upcoming cases.
And fighting corruption with
education -- how
one university in Ghana
incorporates ethics
courses to help guide the next
generation
of Africa's leaders.
PATRICK AWUAH, President, Ashesi
University:
We need a lot of innovation.
We need people who are trained
to drive that.
And we need people who are going
to be working
on the government side.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Neil Gorsuch has
been sworn
in as the 113th Supreme Court
justice.
The 49-year-old former appeals
court judge
fills the nearly 14-month
vacancy created
by the death of Antonin Scalia,
and it restores
the court's conservative
majority.
During a White House Rose Garden
ceremony,
Gorsuch received praise from
President Trump,
and took the second of two
oaths, this one
administered by Justice Anthony
Kennedy, for
whom Gorsuch once served as
clerk.
NEIL GORSUCH, Supreme Court
Associate Justice:
And to the American people, I am
humbled by
the trust placed in me today.
I will never forget that to whom
much is given,
much will be expected.
And I promise you that I will do
all my powers
permit to be a faithful servant
of the Constitution
and laws of this great nation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we will take
a closer look
at the impact Justice Gorsuch
could have on
the high court a little later in
the program.
In the day's other news, there's
word the
governor of Alabama, Robert
Bentley, is resigning
amid allegations he used state
resources to
hide a romantic affair with an
aide.
Jail records in Montgomery
County showed that
Bentley was booked today on two
campaign and
ethics charges.
Alabama's lieutenant governor,
Kay Ivey, is
expected to succeed him.
Don Dailey, who is the host of
Alabama Public
TV's "Capital Journal," has been
following
the story.
Don Dailey, thank you for being
here.
Tell us what the governor is
accused of.
DON DAILEY, Alabama Public TV:
All these charges,
as you mentioned, relate to his
alleged inappropriate
relationship with his former top
political
aide, Rebekah Mason.
The legislature here a year ago
initiated
impeachment articles against the
governor.
And, as a matter of fact,
hearings in those
articles of impeachment started
today, while,
at the same time, officials were
behind closed
doors negotiating a resignation
deal with
Governor Bentley under which he
would plead
to lesser charges, thus the
campaign finance
charges that you talked about.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, the governor
has denied
this for the longest time.
Is that right?
DON DAILEY: He has.
He has denied any wrongdoing.
He said that he and his former
top political
aide never had a physical
affair, that he
made inappropriate remarks to
her, and he
apologized for those a year ago.
He has also insisted that he has
done nothing
illegal in the furtherance of
that alleged
affair.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And since it came
out so many
months ago, why, Don Dailey, has
it taken
this long to get to this point?
DON DAILEY: Alabama has never
impeached a
governor.
In fact, there has never been
but one other
impeachment process against a
constitutional
officer in 100 years.
So, once these articles of
impeachment were
brought, the legislature
basically had to
create the process from scratch.
It began doing that about a year
ago.
It then hired a special counsel
to investigate
the charges against the
governor.
And it was finally ready to
present those
findings in the hearings that
started today.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And so the
governor was actually
booked in a county jail today on
these ethics
charges?
DON DAILEY: He had to go to the
Montgomery
County Jail to be booked and
fingerprinted
on these misdemeanor charges as
part of the
process, and then he was
expected to go over
to the Capitol and meet the
press, where he
was formally expected to resign.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And the reaction
of Alabama
citizens so far?
DON DAILEY: Alabama citizens, by
and large,
have been clamoring for a
resolution to this
one way or the other for quite
some time,
at least according to a lot of
lawmakers that
we have spoken with.
In the last 24 hours, both the
heads of the
Alabama House and Senate have
also called
for Bentley to step down.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Don Dailey with
Alabama Public
Television, we thank you very
much.
DON DAILEY: Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Meantime, a state
of emergency
has gone into effect in Egypt,
after yesterday's
Palm Sunday suicide bombings at
two Coptic
Christian churches.
At least 45 people were killed
in the ISIS-claimed
attacks in Alexandria and Tanta.
Mourners carried wooden coffins
through the
streets today, as relatives
began burying
their loved ones.
It was the deadliest day for
Egyptian Christians
in decades.
Officials in China are calling
for restraint
today, amid heightening tensions
around the
Korean Peninsula.
The comments come after a U.S.
Navy strike
group moved closer to the area
over the weekend,
in a show of force.
In Beijing, a Chinese Foreign
Ministry spokesman
called for dialogue in
addressing North Korea's
nuclear and weapons activities.
HUA CHUNYING, Spokeswoman,
Chinese Ministry
of Foreign Affairs (through
translator): China
has been paying close attention
to the development
of the situation on the Korean
Peninsula.
We think that, under current
conditions, the
parties involved should exercise
restraint,
and should avoid conducting
activities that
will deteriorate and escalate
difficulties
in this region.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Meanwhile, the
nuclear envoys
from China and South Korea met
in Seoul today.
They agreed to take -- quote --
"strong measures"
if Pyongyang carries out more
nuclear or intercontinental
ballistic missile tests.
There's been another staffing
shuffle at the
National Security Council.
It's been widely reported K.T.
McFarland, one of President
Trump's top national
security advisers, will be
reassigned to become
the next U.S. ambassador to
Singapore.
National Security Adviser H.R.
McMaster has
been reorganizing his team since
his predecessor,
Michael Flynn, was forced to
resign.
United Airlines faced public
outcry today,
after video posted online showed
a passenger
being dragged off an overbooked
flight in
Chicago.
In the cell phone sequence,
authorities pull
a screaming man from his seat,
and then drag
him down the aisle by his arms,
as other passengers
shout.
Airline officials asked for
customers by name
to leave the plane.
Three did voluntarily.
Chicago's Aviation Department
says an officer
involved in the incident has
been placed on
leave.
Wells Fargo is clawing back an
additional
$75 million from two former
executives over
an account fraud scandal.
A new report out today from the
bank's board
said an aggressive sales culture
led employees
to open millions of checking and
credit accounts
without customers' permission.
It said former CEO John Stumpf
and community
bank executive Carrie Tolstedt
were both involved
or tolerated aggressive sales
marketing over
a period of years.
And stocks finished flat on Wall
Street today.
The Dow Jones industrial average
gained less
than two points to close at
20658.
The Nasdaq rose three, and the
S&P 500 added
over a point-and-a-half.
The 2017 Pulitzer Prize winners
were announced
today in New York.
Writer Colson Whitehead won the
prize for
fiction for his book "The
Underground Railroad."
David Fahrenthold of The
Washington Post won
in the National Reporting
category for investigating
President Trump's philanthropy
claims.
And the Breaking News reporting
prize went
to The East Bay Times in
California, for its
coverage of last year's deadly
Oakland warehouse
fire.
And Spain's Sergio Garcia has
ended his golf
major drought.
The 37-year-old won the coveted
Green Jacket
at the Masters in Augusta,
Georgia, last night.
Garcia rallied to beat
Englishman Justin Rose
on the first hole of a sudden
death playoff.
It comes 18 years after he
joined the professional
golf tour.
Congratulations.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
former Chairman
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
Admiral Mike
Mullen on the day's global hot
spots; how
the newest justice is likely to
change the
Supreme Court; a new top dog
among U.S. automakers;
and much more.
Supreme Court; a new top dog
among U.S. automakers;
and much more.
Now we return to the U.S.
missile strikes
on Syria and what the Trump
administration's
options for dealing with that
now-six-year-old
civil war.
Our chief foreign affairs
correspondent, Margaret
Warner, begins our coverage.
REX TILLERSON, U.S. Secretary of
State: We
rededicate ourselves to holding
to account
any and all who commit crimes
against the
innocents anywhere in the world.
MARGARET WARNER: Secretary of
State Rex Tillerson
made that vow today at a
memorial ceremony
for victims of a Nazi massacre.
He spoke ahead of a G7 meeting
in Italy.
His message came just days after
dozens of
U.S. cruise missiles struck a
Syrian air base
in response to another massacre,
a chemical
attack that killed more than 80
people in
rebel-held Idlib province.
Syria dominated today's summit,
and all eyes
were on Tillerson for clues as
to what the
U.S. plans to do next.
QUESTION: Mr. Foreign Minister,
are (INAUDIBLE)
the U.S. and its position on
Assad?
MARGARET WARNER: Those questions
came after
Tillerson and U.N. Ambassador
Nikki Haley
appeared to send mixed messages
yesterday
about U.S. policy on Syria going
forward,
most notably on the future of
Syrian President
Bashar al- Assad.
Tillerson told CBS' "Face the
Nation" that
defeating the Islamic State, not
removing
Assad, remained the top
priority.
REX TILLERSON: Once the ISIS
threat has been
reduced or eliminated, I think
we can turn
our attention directly to
stabilizing the
situation in Syria.
We are hopeful that we can
prevent a continuation
of the civil war, and that we
can bring the
parties to the table to begin
the process
of political discussions.
Clearly, that requires the
participation of
the regime, with the support of
their allies.
MARGARET WARNER: But Haley
seemed to suggest
otherwise on CNN's "STATE OF THE
UNION."
NIKKI HALEY, U.S. Ambassador to
the United
Nations: There's not any sort of
option where
a political solution is going to
happen with
Assad at the head of the regime.
Well, regime change is something
that we think
is going to happen, because all
of the parties
are going to see that Assad is
not the leader
that needs to be taking place
for Syria.
MARGARET WARNER: Today in
Washington, White
House Press Secretary Sean
Spicer tried to
square the two statements.
SEAN SPICER, White House Press
Secretary:
I can't imagine a stable and
peaceful Syria
where Bashar al-Assad is in
power.
And there can be a multipronged
approach.
We are ensuring that ISIS is
contained and
there is a de-escalation of the
proliferation
of chemical weapons at the same
time creating
the environment for a change in
leadership.
MARGARET WARNER: Spicer also
raised the possibility
of U.S. military action against
Assad for
use of conventional weapons.
SEAN SPICER: If you gas a baby,
if you put
a barrel bomb into innocent
people, I think
you can -- you will see a
response from this
president.
MARGARET WARNER: Tillerson, who
has charged
that Syria's principal backer,
Russia, was
either -- quote -- "complicit or
simply incompetent"
in Syria's use of chemical
weapons, heads
to Moscow for meetings
Wednesday.
He will meet with Foreign
Minister Sergei
Lavrov, but not, the Kremlin
announced today,
with President Vladimir Putin.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Margaret Warner.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In a statement
this afternoon,
U.S. Defense Secretary James
Mattis said Friday's
U.S. missile strike damaged or
destroyed 20
percent of Syria's operational
aircraft, and
that jets could no longer refuel
or rearm
at that base.
For more on U.S. options in
Syria, relations
with Russia and the ongoing
crisis with North
Korea, I sat down a short time
ago with retired
Admiral Mike Mullen.
He served as chairman of the
Joint Chiefs
of Staff from 2007 to 2011.
Syria, first of all.
Was the U.S. strike on that
airfield justified?
ADM.
MICHAEL MULLEN, Former Joints
Chiefs Chairman:
I think it was justified.
I think it sent a pretty strong
message that
the use of chemical weapons,
which are banned
globally, is not to be
tolerated.
And I think that was the main
message.
What has been a little
surprising to me, anyway,
is to find out through media
that there actually
have been several chemical
attacks recently.
Now, with some belief on my
part, and I think
a lot of people, that we thought
we got rid
of the chemical weapons with the
regime that
President Obama and President
Putin put in
place.
That's a bit of a surprise, but
I think we
have to send the message that
this is unacceptable.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do you think that
message has
been received?
What do you think this
accomplished?
ADM.
MICHAEL MULLEN: I think the
message has been
received.
And it was really focused on
that.
I certainly have seen the
discussion that,
after the fact, that that air
base was back
in operations.
That didn't surprise me, but I
thought it
was proportional, which I think
is important.
It was focused on the air force,
which has
been barrel bombing its people,
you know,
for some time, and, in that
regard, a pretty
strong message.
Will it, in fact, be absorbed by
Assad and
others?
I don't know.
I think that's what we're going
to have to
wait and see.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do you think it
means that
if Assad uses chemical weapons
again, the
U.S. will strike again?
ADM.
MICHAEL MULLEN: I don't know the
answer to
that.
Certainly, you know, from where
I sit, there's
an expectation that, if he
continues, obviously,
he will continue to pay a price
for that.
And so we will see.
It's just such a tragedy to see
what he has
done to his own countrymen, you
know, the
civilians, the women, the
children, and just
the visible images of that
chemical strike.
I don't think -- I think, in the
long run,
he loses if he continues to do
that.
How that happens, what the --
I'm not really
sure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, is it clear
to you, Admiral
Mullen, what the priority of the
Trump administration
is now toward Syria?
Is it mainly to continue the
fight against
ISIS?
Is it more now against President
Assad?
I think many people are having
difficulty
understanding.
ADM.
MICHAEL MULLEN: Well, I think --
and I thought
General McMaster yesterday on
the Sunday show
was excellent in sort of framing
it, that
there is going to be some of
both, clearly.
The priority, it seems to me, is
ISIS, and
that was used for justification
for this attack,
and in terms of supporting,
fighting ISIS,
and responding to the use of
chemical weapons.
My own personal view is, I
think, you know,
in the long run -- and I don't
know how long
that is, but I think it's a
while -- that
Assad doesn't have much of a
future in that
country.
I worry a little bit about --
quote -- "regime
change."
We haven't had a great deal of
success with
that in years.
That's just really difficult.
That said, I think it's a strong
message,
at least from the Trump
administration, that
we're not going to tolerate his
continuing
to certainly use these weapons.
And we will see where it goes
with respect
to the rest of Syria.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Russia.
The Associated Press is
reporting this afternoon
that, quoting a U.S. official as
saying they
now have concluded that Russia
knew about
that chemical weapons attack
before it happened,
and they may even have gone in
and bombed
the location of the attack in
order to hide
evidence that chemical weapons
were used.
If that's the case, what can the
U.S. do about
it?
ADM.
MICHAEL MULLEN: Well, I think
just the strike
itself, our strike itself was a
pretty strong
signal to Russia in terms of
starting to draw
a line, if you will, in the sand
that there
are limits, first of all.
Secondly, I think it undermines
the use of
chemical weapons, certain
weapons, certainly
undermined Putin.
I know Secretary Tillerson is on
his way to
Moscow this week.
And I expect -- I mean, I don't
know for a
fact, but I expect he will carry
a very strong
message to Russia.
McMaster yesterday talked about
he thought
it was important that Russia, in
fact, asked
themselves what they're doing
and what they
hope to accomplish.
There's been a considerable
amount of press
on deconflicting the U.S. and
Russia.
And I think that will continue,
even though
Russia has called it off, per
se.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You think what
will continue?
ADM.
MICHAEL MULLEN: I think the
deconfliction
between the forces will
continue, although
it's a pretty mixed battlefield
on the ground.
I suspect that the militaries
will figure
out a way to continue to do
that.
But I think there's -- in the
long term, the
solution in Syria is politically
driven.
And I put it in two big pieces.
One is, we have to stop the
killing.
And the other is, we need to let
the refugees
-- we need to let Syrian
citizens go home.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that was part
of my question.
Can it be done?
Can progress be made without
Russian participation
and Russian agreement?
ADM.
MICHAEL MULLEN: No.
I have believed for years that
Russia was
going to be part of the solution
even before
they went in.
Obviously, it became much more
evidence when
they did go in.
And I don't think there is any
way that this
can be solved without the U.S.
and Russia
getting together and figuring
out politically
what the solution is.
There's going to be a need to
include other
political leaders in the region,
but certainly
the U.S. and Russia are the two
key ones.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally, Admiral
Mullen, North
Korea, right now, there is a
U.S. carrier
group on the way to the Korean
Peninsula,
in the wake of North Korean
missile tests.
ADM.
MICHAEL MULLEN: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you were part
of a Council
on Foreign Relations report some
months ago
saying that the next
administration had to
make getting China involved in
dealing with
North Korea a priority.
Is it your sense that the
administration is
-- this administration is doing
that successfully?
Is that happening?
And do you think the Chinese can
make a difference?
ADM.
MICHAEL MULLEN: I think the
Chinese can make
a huge difference.
And I think, if they don't, and
without them,
that the options are pretty
drastic and pretty
bad pretty quickly.
I do think the Trump
administration has taken
a more regular approach.
I see reported that there have
been National
Security Council meetings on
this, so there
clearly is a planning process
which is going
on.
I think the message from the
president, the
North Korean leadership, and the
rest of the
world is that there are limits
on what he's
going to tolerate.
That was clearly priority
message in his meeting
with Xi Jinping, President Xi
Jinping, from
China on Thursday.
All of those steps, I think, are
positive
in, again, what is an enormously
complex problem.
He's got nuclear weapons that
are buried deeply,
that are very difficult to
impossible to hit.
He's emerging on more and more
capability.
And the longer -- this is a very
tough solution
set, no matter what you do.
But I do believe, the longer we
wait, the
more challenging the solution
set becomes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The longer the
U.S. waits to
do what?
ADM.
MICHAEL MULLEN: The longer we
wait to take
some sort of action, whether
it's negotiations
or some kind of military
operation, depending
on what the president would
choose, the more
difficult those solution sets
will become,
back to where you -- where they
started, from
the perspective of this solution
must go through
Beijing.
We need to incentivize Beijing
to do this.
We need to figure out, if we
can, how to incentivize
the leadership in North Korea,
if there is
a possibility to do that -- and
I'm not sure
it is -- to avoid what will be a
potentially
drastic capability that allows
that very uncertain
leader in North Korea the
ability to strike
the United States of America
with a nuclear
weapon.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Serious problems
in all these
directions.
ADM.
MICHAEL MULLEN: There are.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Admiral Mike
Mullen, we thank
you very much for coming by.
ADM.
MICHAEL MULLEN: Thanks, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the domestic
front, as we
reported, the Supreme Court
today welcomed
its newest member, Neil Gorsuch,
who brings
the court back to its full
compliment of nine
justices.
Jeffrey Brown takes it from
there.
JEFFREY BROWN: Now that he's
officially Justice
Gorsuch, we confront the
question of how he
might influence the high court
and its work
going forward.
And for that, we turn, as we
always do, to
Marcia Coyle, chief Washington
correspondent
for "The National Law Journal."
So, Marcia, on one hand you have
a conservative
justice replacing another
conservative justice,
so you wouldn't expect major
ideological shifts.
MARCIA COYLE, "The National Law
Journal":
Well, that's right, Jeff.
I think it is true that Justice
Gorsuch will
not change the conservative
direction of the
Supreme Court, but that doesn't
mean that
his vote is going to be
insignificant.
And I think we saw that just
last term, for
example, with Justice Scalia's
death.
The court split 4-4 in a major
immigration
case affecting millions of
people.
It also divided 4-4 in a major
labor union
case affecting thousands of
union and non-union
workers.
JEFFREY BROWN: Which may well
come back.
MARCIA COYLE: Absolutely.
It's an agenda case on the part
of a conservative
organization that already is
pushing another
case toward the Supreme Court.
So, this court has been divided
ideologically,
and Justice Gorsuch will play a
role in the
outcome of some very important
cases.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, and
let's look at
some of them.
Most immediately would be even
this week,
right, where he for the first
time takes part
in that decision-making of which
cases will
go forward.
MARCIA COYLE: That's right.
The justices will meet Thursday
in a private
conference.
And they go over petitions that
have been
submitted to the court in which
parties are
asking the court to hear their
case.
And there are actually two
petitions that
he may play an important role in
whether the
court takes or doesn't take
them.
One is a case from his home
state, Colorado.
It involves a baker who feels
that it's against
his religious beliefs to bake a
cake for a
gay couple's wedding.
JEFFREY BROWN: That one got a
lot of attention
early on, right?
MARCIA COYLE: It did.
And it's been hanging in the
court since early
December.
So, we're not quite sure what
the court plans
to do with it.
And then another case,
interesting case, out
of California involves the
Second Amendment
and California's law that
requires a very
good reason for you to have a
concealed carry
gun, a permit for that.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, and
then, next week,
he starts hearing cases for the
first time,
right?
MARCIA COYLE: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: And the biggest
one next week
is a church and state separation
case out
of Missouri.
MARCIA COYLE: That's right, and
it involves
Trinity Lutheran Church of
Missouri, which
is challenging an amendment to
Missouri's
constitution, state
constitution, that prohibits
direct and indirect support of
religious organizations
and institutions.
Trinity Lutheran Church operates
a playground,
day care center, and it wanted
to participate
in a state grant program that
allows organizations
to refurbish playgrounds with
recycled tires.
But Trinity Lutheran was turned
down because
it is a religious institution.
So it's claiming that that state
constitutional
amendment violates our First
Amendment free
exercise of religion clause.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, so
then we start
to look at the longer term.
And even as I say that, I
realize he's a younger
man, so the longer term for him
could be a
very long time, right?
But in the more -- the closer
long term, one
of the possible cases would be,
well, for
example, Donald Trump's
immigration case,
right?
MARCIA COYLE: Immigration.
Right, the executive order on
immigration.
That is percolating in a number
of courts
around the country, federal
appellate courts
that could rule soon.
And I think some of them are
hearing arguments
in May.
We may see decisions from those
courts this
summer, depending on the urgency
of the government
in getting the Supreme Court to
take a look
at this.
If the government loses, or if
the other side
loses, either way, that's going
to get to
the Supreme Court, undoubtedly.
JEFFREY BROWN: Just in our last
minute, let
me put you on the spot a little
bit.
We have talked about this in the
past.
But now we have -- we just went
through a
process with a lot of questions
about impact
on the Senate, right, of going
through the
so-called nuclear option.
MARCIA COYLE: Right.
JEFFREY BROWN: But also lasting
questions
about impact on the court itself
-- a partisan
country, a polarized country.
To what degree can we say that
this has had
any impact that you might see
about a polarized,
partisan court?
MARCIA COYLE: This court is
ideologically
divided right now.
Whether it's partisan may depend
on your point
of view.
I tend to think that ideology is
stronger
here than any desire to reach
decisions in
order to benefit a particular
political party.
What it all comes down to
eventually, Jeff,
is that presidential elections
are very important,
and if you agree with what the
court is doing,
the justices and the majority,
or you don't,
you really have to pay attention
to who you
elect as president.
JEFFREY BROWN: Marcia Coyle of
"The National
Law Journal," thank you, as
always.
MARCIA COYLE: My pleasure, Jeff.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": a
university
in Ghana aims to educate
students about corruption;
our Monday duo looks ahead to
the week in
politics; and the last show for
the famed
and sometimes controversial
Ringling Brothers.
But first: some eye-popping news
in the automotive
world.
The market value of Tesla, the
manufacturer
of high-end electric cars, has
actually surpassed
that of Ford and General Motors,
both of which
sell millions more cars than
Tesla does.
William Brangham takes a closer
look.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Here are some
head-scratching
numbers to consider.
Tesla's market value is $50
billion, yet Tesla
may lose nearly a billion
dollars this year,
whereas, combined, Ford and GM
are expected
to earn more than $15 billion.
Last year, Tesla sold just about
80,000 vehicles.
Ford and GM?
They sold nearly 17 million.
James Stewart is a business
columnist for
The New York Times and a staff
writer for
"The New Yorker," and he's here
to help us
understand why Tesla's value is
skyrocketing.
James Stewart, welcome to the
"NewsHour."
You know these numbers very,
very well.
What is going on here?
JAMES STEWART, The New York
Times: Well, these
numbers are pretty amazing.
They make no rational sense,
really.
But Tesla is what I call the
sort of ultimate
story stock, which means
investors care about
the story.
They don't care about the
numbers.
They do not care that it's
losing.
They have lost over $500 million
last year,
may lose a billion this year.
And they don't really care that
GM and Ford
are making billions of dollars
in profit.
The story with Tesla is that
they are going
to dominate the auto market,
that they are
going to create the world's
safest car, that
they are going to take over the
battery market,
and that they are going to
dominate and reinvent
the electric grid.
I mean, these are all huge
markets, and they
think Tesla is going to dominate
every one
of them.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: As you wrote
in a recent
column in The New York Times,
there have been
a lot of story stock and story
companies that
the story turned out to be a lot
more fiction
than fact.
How do we know whether Tesla is
going to be
one of those?
JAMES STEWART: Well, we don't.
And most story stocks which
trade at these
astronomical levels end up very
badly.
There were scores of these in
the dot-com
boom now forgotten, worthless.
But, more recently, the Amazon
story has caused
investors to be very excited.
Amazon didn't make any money for
years.
It plowed all its revenues back
into R&D.
But the story is, it was going
to dominate
the vast global retail market.
It still hasn't achieved that.
It still is not making huge
amounts of money.
But investors in Amazon have
done very, very
well over a period that's now
going on to
decades.
So, stock investors in Tesla can
do well as
long as the story holds.
So, every time you see a bit of
data that
confirms the story, the stock
surges.
Like, it had modestly better
sales in the
last quarter than expected.
The stock was up 7 percent.
Now, I will say for Tesla, it
also has delivered
a product that people love.
It's quality.
It looks great.
It performs great.
And so far, it has actually met
its promises,
even though they seemed
farfetched at one
time.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: I mean, I
would agree with
you, all those
characterizations.
It's a beautiful car.
I have ridden in one.
It's a fantastic vehicle to be
in.
But there have been some quality
and reliability
issues.
And primarily their customers
have been luxury
market customers.
I know Tesla is now trying to
roll out a more
mid-market car.
If they have those same
reliability problems,
do you worry that that could
really dent their
image?
JAMES STEWART: Well, I have to
say, in Tesla's
defense, that, yes, there have
been some issues,
but nothing out of the ordinary.
In fact, I think, just in
January, the federal
monitors gave it its highest
safest evaluation.
And one of the stories that
people are so
excited about is that its
autonomous driving
technology is going to make the
car incredibly
safe.
But we will see.
You're right.
It is the high-end customer so
far that is
driving the sales.
And a big, big step for them is
when they
try to expand that market by
moving into more
of the mass market car with this
3 model at
a much higher production level.
Can they keep the quality levels
up?
Can they keep the consumer
satisfaction levels
up?
Again, though, I have to say,
Tesla was very
smart.
They start at the high end.
They develop incredible brand
allure, and
now they're moving down market.
GM, I think, had a terrific car
first with
the Volt, now the Bolt, but they
buried in
the Chevy name plate, and it
didn't take on
any allure whatsoever for
consumers.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: What are the
other automakers
saying about this?
This must make them livid.
JAMES STEWART: Well, they won't
say it publicly
about a competitor, but they're
tearing their
hair out.
They don't get it at all,
because Tesla gets
the benefit of every possible
doubt from investors.
They get the benefit of none.
Tesla doesn't have profits, so
you can't measure
its stock compared to profits.
But profit-to-earning ratio,
which is a common
stock measure, Ford and GM have
some of the
lowest in the stock market.
As Tesla trades at like seven
times the revenue,
Ford, when I looked this week,
was trading
at 0.3 times revenue.
I mean, I do feel kind of bad
for them.
People feel the sun has set on
the traditional
auto industry, and they just are
not getting
any benefit of the doubt.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
James B. Stewart,
thank you very much.
JAMES STEWART: Sure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The continent of
Africa does
not now hold many
internationally well-known
universities, but one man is
trying to change
that, a one-time Microsoft
executive who was
educated in the United States,
Patrick Awuah.
As special correspondent Fred de
Sam Lazaro
reports, as part of his Agents
for Change
series, one special focus of
classes is to
teach Africa's next generation
of leaders
about ethics.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: It looks
like a pretty
typical college campus, with
students working
in computer labs, studying at
the library,
or hanging out with friends.
But Ashesi University, in the
West African
nation of Ghana, has embarked on
an experiment
which its founder hopes will
help start to
fundamentally change the entire
continent.
PATRICK AWUAH, President, Ashesi
University:
In the next three decades or so,
the population
of Africa is going to double,
and something
like 40 percent of working-age
people are
going to be Africans in the
world.
A lot of jobs need to be
created.
And so we need to be educating
the next bench
in a way that they're going to
go create those
jobs and create those
opportunities for people.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Patrick
Awuah was born
and raised in Ghana, but came to
the United
States on scholarship to get an
undergraduate
degree in engineering from
Swarthmore and
an MBA from the University of
California,
Berkeley.
He went on to become a program
manager at
Microsoft.
When he decided to return to his
homeland,
he assumed he would start a
software company,
but quickly realized the system
of higher
education was so poor, there
wasn't a competent
work force to hire.
Experts say the problem with
education in
Africa is not so much that there
aren't enough
institutions, but, rather, it's
in what students
are taught and how they're
taught it, with
an emphasis much more on rote
learning and
memorization, much less on
critical thinking,
on thinking for oneself.
PATRICK AWUAH: Under colonial
rule, the educational
system was really designed for
that, to educate
people to follow instructions
and to do things
in a very consistent way.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: So, Awuah
decided he had
to start his own university.
With money from American
friends, colleagues
and foundations, he raised $2.5
million to
open a school with an initial
class of 30
freshman in 2002.
Ashesi has now grown to a campus
of nearly
800 students.
The guiding principle throughout
has been
a laser-like focus on three
principles: ethical
leadership, innovation and
entrepreneurship.
PATRICK AWUAH: We need a lot of
innovation.
We need people who are trained
to drive that.
And we need people who are going
to be working
on the government side, who are
going to create
an enabling environment for
that.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Ghana, like
most countries
in Africa, has been plagued by
government-related
corruption, which has hampered
job growth.
ROSE DODD, Professor, Ashesi
University: For
the next three to four minutes,
come up with
a list of things that a brick
can be used
for.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Ashesi's
goal is to teach
students to fight against the
temptations
of corruption and think outside
the box.
It begins almost from the moment
a freshman
arrives on campus and takes a
mandatory course
called Foundations of Design and
Entrepreneurship.
ROSE DODD: How many do you have?
STUDENT: Twenty-nine.
ROSE DODD: Twenty-nine.
(LAUGHTER)
PATRICK AWUAH: The instructor
says, you go
find a problem that you think is
worth solving,
and then come up with an answer
to problem.
It's very open-ended and then...
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: And scary in
part, I imagine.
PATRICK AWUAH: Scary.
It feels like you have been
thrown into this
kind of weird world, where you
can't plant
your feet on the ground.
Right?
It's very different way of
approaching education.
ROSE DODD: When you see a
problem, your first
human instinct is to think of
the first, easiest
solution that comes to mind.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Professor
Rose Dodd, an
Ashesi alumna herself, says she
hopes the
class will encourage her
students to take
on the entrenched establishments
in Ghana.
ROSE DODD: Don't be limited.
Don't feel that whatever the
system is limits
you.
Think about whatever else could
be and then
try it out.
And I think the goal, the end
goal should
be to make life better for
everybody around
you.
MAN: Look at the question on the
board.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Indeed, many
Ashesi graduates
have gone on to do some form of
public service,
whether it's teaching in rural
elementary
or secondary schools, or
mentoring the next
generation of young women.
Yawa Hansen-Quao became the
first female student
council president at Ashesi in
2006.
While in college, she began
thinking about
a way to help women grow into
leadership positions,
a goal that she made a reality
with the founding
of Leading Ladies' Network.
YAWA HANSEN-QUAO, Leading
Ladies' Network:
Our goal as an organization is
to help women
get out of themselves and their
problems and
to start thinking of what kind
of change they
can bring to the community
around them.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: One young
woman that Quao
has mentored is Narkie Agbettor,
another Ashesi
grad.
She has just started her own
small business,
selling virgin coconut oil
products.
And while she's enthusiastic
about her company,
she admits it's not always easy
dealing with
government bureaucracy and
seeing competitors
resort to bribery.
NARKIE AGBETTOR, Business Owner:
There are
solutions to every problem out
there.
It requires thinking.
So, you want to be successful
and you want
to be ethical as well.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Patrick
Awuah knows that
his young, idealistic graduates,
many who
come from families of modest
means, will be
severely tested out in the real
world.
But he hopes the lessons they
have learned
at Ashesi will help guide them.
PATRICK AWUAH: Are some alumni
probably not
holding the line?
Probably.
But I would hope that even those
who are not
holding the line are thinking
twice about
doing it.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: The other
cultural problem
that Awuah hopes to change is
stopping the
so-called brain drain, where,
after college,
people leave the continent to
seek careers
in developed countries.
So far, 90 percent of Ashesi
grads have stayed
and work in Africa.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Fred
de Sam Lazaro
in Accra, Ghana.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Fred's
reporting is a partnership
with the Under-Told Stories
Project at the
University of St. Thomas in
Minnesota.
It's Monday, in other words,
time for Politics
Monday with Amy Walter of The
Cook Political
Report and Tamara Keith of NPR,
who joins
us today from California.
Welcome to both of you.
Tam, I just said California.
You have got to tell us where in
California.
(LAUGHTER)
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: Southern
California.
JUDY WOODRUFF: OK.
That narrows it down a lot.
(LAUGHTER)
TAMARA KEITH: A little bit.
All right, the L.A. area.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right.
Well, let's start by talking
about a very
serious subject, and that is the
decision
by the United States to strike
the airfield
in Syria last week.
And, Amy, we're still dealing
with the strategic,
the military repercussions from
this, but
what about the political?
How is the public reacting?
And then I want to ask you both
about Congress.
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: Yes.
The Congress seems to be giving
somewhat a
mixed message on how they feel
about what
happened in Syria over the
weekend.
There have been at three polls
that have come
out since the strikes happened.
A majority of Americans say they
approve of
this decision, anywhere from 51
to 57 percent.
But then, when you ask them the
next question,
which is, should we do more
things like this,
the majority of Americans say,
we don't want
to see any more airstrikes.
And then when you ask the
question -- and
I think this is also really
important -- about
what the impact has been on the
president,
did Americans rally around the
did this bump up his approval
rating, it really
hasn't done much at all.
His approval rating still stands
somewhere
around 40 percent.
So, you have a public that is
basically, there
are a small majority agreeing
with the strike,
but they don't want to see much
more.
And it hasn't really benefited
the president,
nor has it made people less
likely to support
him.
He's still basically at the same
place he's
always been, which again comes
back to something
we talk about almost every week,
is our deep
polarization in this country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And so much of
this, Tam, I
think, is people -- a matter of
people comparing
how this president is handling
Syria and the
Middle East, that part of the
world, vs. the
way President Obama handled it.
TAMARA KEITH: That's right.
And, in terms of Congress, when
President
Obama went to Congress in 2013
and asked for
authorization to take similar
action back
in 2013, Congress was kind of,
like, wait,
this is a hot potato, we don't
necessarily
want this hot potato.
They found an out that sort of
let them off
the hook with this deal with
Russia to dispose
of the chemical weapons, which,
clearly, in
retrospect, they're not all gone
somehow.
And so Congress has frequently
wanted to have
some ability to weigh in, but
then when it
comes time to actually weigh in
to authorize
the use of military force in a
formal way,
they have had a lot of trouble
agreeing on
something.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Amy, as Tam
just said,
this is exactly what President
Obama...
AMY WALTER: That's right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We're talking
three years later.
AMY WALTER: Different.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But it's what he
was concerned
about, too, and led to the
decision not to.
AMY WALTER: It feels very
familiar.
And a lot that too is the fact
that Americans
feel very similar to the
situation in Syria
today as they did back in 2013.
This is a ABC poll.
Fifty-four percent said they
oppose using
additional airstrikes.
When you look back at where we
were in the
fall of 2013, when then
President Obama was
talking about airstrikes, about
60 percent
opposed doing that.
So, the public isn't any more --
looking forward
anymore today than they were
back then to
getting more deeply involved in
that part
of the world.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Tam, speaking
of Congress,
members going home, went home
this weekend
for two-week Easter recess.
Are they likely to hear much
from the public
about Syria?
Are people still talking about
health care?
What are we expecting in that
regard?
TAMARA KEITH: I think that
health care is
something they're far more
likely to hear
about.
Town halls, if they're happening
-- and fewer
of them are happening.
There are more tele-town halls,
and Facebook
town halls, and any sort of town
hall that
won't allow the same sort of
video images
that dominated during the rise
of the Tea
Party.
Absolutely, they are going to
hear about health
care.
And it's an interesting time for
the health
care legislation.
Republicans in Congress,
realizing they're
about to go home, and not
wanting to say,
wow, we have completely failed
to repeal and
replace the Affordable Care Act,
did some
amendments at the very end,
right before they
left for recess, so that
Republican members
of Congress could go to
Republican districts
and say, well, we're still
working on it,
health care is not dead.
Meanwhile, Democrats are trying
to put a lot
of pressure.
On the left side, progressives
are really
pushing members of Congress and
trying to
make sure that this effort
doesn't come back
to life.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I want to ask you
about that,
Amy, but I also want to get to
another way
of gauging public reaction to
what's going
on in Washington, and that is
these special
congressional elections that are
taking place
in the next couple of weeks.
Very interesting, Republicans
worried about
some of these special
congressional...
AMY WALTER: They are.
We have one coming up tomorrow
in Kansas and
then the next week in Georgia in
two districts
that are heavily Republican.
These districts are special
elections because
their Republican members are now
sitting in
the Cabinet.
And this goes to the issue
really of enthusiasm,
and the enthusiasm gap between
Democrats and
Republicans.
This is what Republicans are
very fearful
about.
They're not seeing that energy
around their
candidates in the same way that
Democrats
are.
And we know that energy equals
turnout, especially
when you have a special
election, where not
a whole lot of people are coming
out and voting.
So, we're going to be looking at
these special
elections, first of all, to see
if there's
an upset.
This would be a very big deal,
especially
in Kansas.
This is a district...
JUDY WOODRUFF: These are red,
very red places.
Right.
AMY WALTER: These are red, red
districts.
This district in Kansas went for
Trump by
almost 30 points.
The president, in fact, now is
making recorded
calls, sending those in right
now.
Ted Cruz, Senator Ted Cruz, is
out there,
again, trying to get people
excited, energized.
But it's Democrats who are
energized.
The anti-Trump momentum, you can
feel both
in the -- how voters are
reacting in these
sort of places, as well as the
fund-raising.
The Democrat in Georgia -- this,
again, a
very Republican district outside
of Atlanta,
a district that Tom Price, the
now HHS secretary,
won easily, very, very close
there -- he's
raised over $8 million as an
unknown candidate.
He's not a celebrity.
But that shows the fervor and
energy out there
on the side of Democrats.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is it, Tam, kind
of the Tea
Party with the shoe on the other
foot now?
TAMARA KEITH: It is certainly
sort of a 180-degree
turnaround.
And, in fact, next weekend,
there is going
to be a Tax Day protest.
This is exactly eight years
after the last
Tax Day protest that was really
the kickoff
for the Tea Party movement.
But, you know, these special
elections are
special for a reason.
They can be sort of -- they
aren't necessarily
good indicators of what's to
some.
Democrats won a special election
in April
of 2010, and then that fall were
completely
knocked out, lost something like
63 seats.
AMY WALTER: The important thing
about the
special elections -- Tam's point
is correct,
you don't want to read too much
into them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
AMY WALTER: But a success for
the Democrats
would be that they do very well,
i.e., they
win, or come close enough that
it impacts
their ability to recruit
candidates to run
in 2018.
People get excited when they see
that you're
getting really close to
Republican seats.
And it helps with fund-raising.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we never
get tired of
talking about elections here.
It's only been five months since
that big
one, when the earth shook.
AMY WALTER: And then we get
midterms, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And when we get
the midterms
coming up.
Amy Walter, Tamara Keith,
Politics Monday,
thank you both.
TAMARA KEITH: You're welcome.
AMY WALTER: You're welcome.
JUDY WOODRUFF: For many years,
146, to be
exact, Ringling Bros. and Barnum
& Bailey
Circus has been awing crowds
with acrobatic
feats and animal stunts.
But the Greatest Show on Earth
is coming to
an end next month.
Its parent company made the
decision after
ticket sales had been dropping
for years.
The circus also struggled with a
long court
battle over the treatment of
animals, particularly
the elephants.
The circus won in court, but the
elephants
were dropped from the show.
We caught up as Ringling Bros.
rolled through
Washington, D.C., one more time,
and spoke
with longtime performers and
their families.
JOHNATHAN LEE IVERSON, Ringling
Bros.: My
name is Johnathan Lee Iverson,
ringmaster
of Ringling Bros. and Barnum &
Bailey.
It's just pure, unadulterated,
unapologetic
entertainment.
Where everything you look at now
is sort of
defiled, circus is the last bit
of magic in
the world, and your children's
imaginations
are safe there.
Your imagination is safe here.
TATIANA TCHALABAEV, Ringling
Bros.: Well,
in this amazing show, I'm
playing the character
of the Queen Tatiana of the
Circus of Fire.
We are artists.
We are performers, like the
people in the
movies.
They're coming out there and
they are doing
the shot.
We are doing live.
We don't have no repeats.
We basically have to perform our
stunts.
JOHNATHAN LEE IVERSON: It's all
about the
impossible.
It's all about really art at its
highest level.
People are flying.
They're talking to animals.
DERRELL WALKER, Father: Kids
love the clowns,
the animals, the cotton candy,
the popcorn,
all that stuff.
So we have a great time.
KATHY ALMASSY, Circus Goer:
We're extremely
disappointed to see it end.
I understand the concerns, but
we're very,
very sad.
Sad to see it end.
WILLIAM, Circus Goer: I'm not
very happy about
it, because I love coming here,
and it's really
nice and fun for me and my
family to hang
out together.
DERRELL WALKER: I like the lions
and the tigers.
I like the suspense.
I like the danger that's
involved.
I mean, it's just -- and they're
beautiful
animals.
They're very beautiful animals,
very, very
majestic.
ANNALISE, Circus Goer: I like
the animals,
like how they're colorful.
STEPHEN PAYNE, Vice President,
Ringling Bros.:
Have the animal rights disputes
hurt Ringling
Bros.?
Yes, it was a factor.
But it wasn't the only factor.
We won in court, and we won in
most legislative
fights that we have.
My name is Stephen Payne.
I'm the vice president of
corporate communications
for Feld Entertainment.
When we transitioned the
elephants off of
the circus last year, we knew we
were going
to see some decline in ticket
sales.
The entertainment landscape has
changed.
When Ringling Bros. started,
there wasn't
TV.
Now there's 1,000 stations.
There wasn't iPhones.
It's a huge, huge undertaking
that requires
an immense number of talented
crew members
to pull off.
ALEXANDER LACEY, Ringling Bros.:
You have
to be completely dedicated to
the animals.
You have to love doing what
you're doing.
It's what keeps you safe.
And I have been doing it now for
22 years
solid.
My name is Alexander Lacey, the
big cat trainer
and presenter here on the
Ringling Bros. and
Barnum & Bailey.
Of course, everybody wants to
see the lion-tiger
trainer get eaten, so I have a
point in my
act where the lions attack on
command, which
is quite a highlight, because
people think
they have suddenly gone out of
control.
But it's a trained movement.
DAVIS VASSALLO, Ringling Bros.:
When you go
to a show, you don't think about
your problem
at home.
You just enjoy the show you, and
you have
a nice time, and you feel like
children again.
My name is Davis Vassallo.
I am the highlight clown of
Ringling Bros.
and Barnum & Bailey.
My grandfather was a clown.
My father was a clown.
I just have fun.
I become like children.
And I think that, for the
people, watching
a clown is a little bit like
watching children.
How can you not smile when you
see children,
a little bit goofy, falling
down, do some
funny things?
And in this moment, you don't
think about
anything else.
TATIANA TCHALABAEV: For us it's
our home.
It's our life.
It's our love.
It's our heart.
It's everything.
When, in the end, our announcer
is saying
it for the last time, enjoy
Ringling Bros.
and Barnum & Bailey Circus, my
tears are coming
out.
JOHNATHAN LEE IVERSON: When
those curtains
close, it -- you know, a part of
a part of
us ends in America.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Starting tonight
on PBS, "American
Experience" presents a
three-night series
about the war that at the time
was thought
to be the war to end all wars.
"The Great War" explores the
reluctance of
President Woodrow Wilson to lead
the United
States into the deadly conflict,
the experiences
of African-American and Latino
soldiers as
they fought for their country
and their rights.
And it probes one of the most
oppressive domestic
crackdowns, as suspected German
supporters
were rounded up.
"The Great War" airs starting
tonight through
Wednesday on most PBS stations.
On the "NewsHour" online right
now, you can
watch our in-depth conversations
with some
of the writers who were awarded
Pulitzer Prizes
today, including novelist Colson
Whitehead
and playwright Lynn Nottage.
You can find those interviews in
our roundup
of the winners.
That and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Tuesday: a look at the
dueling visions
of enforcement and compassion in
the Trump
administration's war on drugs.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.